Creates Introduction to the FVM (#10)
filecoin-project/fvm-docs: docs/index.md

---
title: "Filecoin Virtual Machine"
description: "The Filecoin Virtual Machine (FVM) allows users to write their own smart-contracts and run them against the Filecoin network. This website contains all the documetation for the FVM project, including examples and reference material to help developers build on the FVM."
lead: "The Filecoin Virtual Machine (FVM) is an interface that developers can use to deploy smart-contracts on the Filecoin network. FVM contracts will introduce the ability to perfom on-chain computation, or the computation of a state. This is the perfect pairing of blockchain storage and computation that Web3 has been waiting for."
---

> # The Filecoin Virtual Machine
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You don't need to use a `h1` title if there's already one in the front-matter.

> The Filecoin Virtual Machine (FVM) is an interface that enables developers to deploy smart contracts on the Filecoin blockchain. FVM support for smart contracts provides the ability to perform on-chain state computations that guide storage deals from pre-commit through committed states. This is the perfect pairing of blockchain storage and computation that Web3 has been waiting for.

Reviewer: > FVM support for smart contracts provides the ability to perform on-chain state computations that guide storage deals from pre-commit through committed states.

This sentence doesn't mean anything to new readers. Try simplifying things a bit, or just remove this sentence all together.

This whole paragraph is mostly a duplicate of the `lead` text. Let's remove this whole paragraph.

Author: Two questions:
1. I had asked before: Why, all of the sudden, are we mixing up metadata with customer-facing data? We've never done this before, that I have seen. The preview I saw displayed the metadata as well as the text intended for the customer. If I have a change for the title and the Lead, should I edit it in the metadata?
2. I don't think c-suite audiences will understand "on-chain computation, or the computation of a state." Can we expect them to know about filecoin and storage provider deals? This needs some sort of explanation....without going into great detail.

Author: We discussed this on fvm with raulk and stebalien at (fvm channel)[https://filecoinproject.slack.com/archives/C029MT4PQB1/p1655496096856579], so see how you like the changes.

Author: @johnnymatthews Here is Raul's last suggestion:
"The FVM unlocks the ability to deploy new features to the Filecoin blockchain in the form of actors. Actors can access system functionality and can interact with one another. Users can invoke these actors and obtain proof of execution."

This is my latest submission:
"The Filecoin Virtual Machine (FVM) enables programmers to create and deploy smart contracts on the Filecoin blockchain. With smart contracts, programmers can create new features, opening up a wide range of storage and data possibilities, that are provable and traceable."

I thought the introduction of the concept of actors was too technical (more about how it's done, than what it accomplishes). I introduce the concept of actors a little later in the page under Vision and Goals, where I explain the goal to provide speedier processing because actors take up so much space. In that section, they really need to understand what actors are. I used Raul's point that we should address the outcomes the c-suite would look for and appreciate, including "new features." In the spirit of his point, I also added "storage and data" possibilities. I include "proof of execution" (proof of execution of what?) in concept, but take it out of the passive voice which is hard to understand, and instead say "storage and data that are provable and traceable" making it more active.

## Why the FVM is useful

> There has been a huge demand from the developer community for compatibility with Ethereum and Solidity out of the box. With the FVM, developers can access the massive corpus of audited and battle-tested smart contracts written in Solidity for the Ethereum Virtual Machnine (EVM). The FVM also supports other foreign runtimes and virtual machines, such as JS/SES, LLVm, IR, and BPF.

Reviewer: > compatibility with Ethereum and Solidity out of the box.

Compatibility with what?

> JS/SES, LLVm, IR, and BPF

Can we get external links to these VMs. Also, that's a lot of acronyms. Any chance we can get the full names listed here?

Author: @johnnymatthews I'm researching links for these and SES. I found two links of interest:
- (SES: Securing JavaScript in the real world)[https://medium.com/agoric/ses-securing-javascript-in-the-real-world-4f309e6b66a6] This one seems more useful to our audience. I'm inclined to give this one.
- (npm SES)[https://www.npmjs.com/package/ses] This one is very technical and would be useful for developers.

Author: @johnnymatthews Meanwhile, LLVm states something very unfortunate and confusing up front: 
(LLVm Compiler Infrastructure)[https://llvm.org/]. It says, "Despite its name, LLVM has little to do with traditional virtual machines." (Do you want me to engage our engineers  (Raoul, I guess) in conversation as to why we are compatible with it?)

Author: For this whole list, the main point of this list is to say that we are not _limited_ to EVM. Instead of giving links to each of these, maybe we could say something like, "Ethereum VM is our main focus, but we will be offering support for other foreign virtual machines." (I'll continue to propose useful links in the meantime.)

Author: We discussed this as well in the fvm channel, so see how you like the changes.

The FVM is flexible. Because it's not tightly-coupled to Filecoin, developers can adapt to it in other contexts, such as the Interplanetary File System (IPFS) and Interplanetary Linked Data (IPLD).

> The FVM is easy for developers who know IPLD to adapt to. The state tree and actor states that the FVM uses to guide storage deals from pre-commit through committed states are IPLD objects.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This sentence isn't necessary. We've already mentioned that the FVM works well with IPLD.

## Vision and goals

> To mitigate the well-known risks of compiling Solidity used by the EVM, we're not working directly in Solidity. Instead, we're building the reference SDK in Rust, because it produces very succinct WASM code and keeps runtime costs down.

Reviewer: > To mitigate the well-known risks of compiling Solidity used by the EVM

What well-known risks?

Author: @johnnymatthews That will take research, maybe a lot. Even the professors at MIT could not articulate it well. I have some places to start looking. I understand your requests, and they're great points, but the challenge is: the reason that FVM is useful and our vision and goals are actually very technical, so I tried to keep it light and not go into detail for the c-suite.  But these are great points, so I'll try to find another approach. 
Maybe instead of pointing out the technical reasons, it would suffice to say that it is well known that Solidity has weaknesses that are resulting in the loss of millions of dollars a week. That is what I know so far. I thought one reason was that it was Turing Complete, but your guys said that that line of thought has lost acceptance and gave me some other material. This is a tricky issue for "high-level for c-suite".... Let me research further.

Because the FVM essentially executes computation on IPLD inputs to produce outputs, building libraries and primitives to interact with IPLD data is a core priority.

> Because user-defined actors will exponentially increase demand for space on the blockchain, we're looking into solutions, such as sharding (a kind of partitioning) and hierarchical consensus with parallel execution, both of which support speedier processing.

Reviewer: It seems weird to have both paragraphs start with _because_. Can we merge these two paragraphs together?

Author: @johnnymatthews LOL. I had 4 like that and narrowed it down to two. Will try again.

> ## Use-cases
> 
> Here are some use cases that are possible with the FVM. With centralized data centers, a lot of these use cases were incredibly hard, if not impossible. With decentralization and Layer 1 programmability (computation for state changes), we're unleashing boundless opportunities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use-cases

Here are some use cases that are possible with the FVM. With centralized data centers, a lot of these use cases were incredibly hard, if not impossible. With decentralization and Layer 1 programmability (computation for state changes), we're unleashing boundless opportunities.
```

> ## Use-cases
>
> Here are some use cases

Use-cases or use cases?

> a lot of these use cases were incredibly hard,

They still _are_ hard. Centralized data centres still exist.

> With decentralization and Layer 1 programmability (computation for state changes), we're unleashing boundless opportunities.

This sentence feels too gimmicky. _we're unleashing boundless opportunities_ is marketing copy. Let's stick to facts.

Author: @johnnymatthews Thanks for catching the hyphen. Not needed. 
I agree about the gimmicky. Sometimes I'm not sure if a PL wants to keep a certain style or not. Thanks for releasiing me from that.

### Decentralized, verifiable computation

> The FVM enables both computation and storage under a single roof. Imagine being able to apply a computation on data, incentivizing its execution all the way to the end, and certifying that the result AND the output are verifiably correct.

Reviewer: > to apply a computation on data

Is this grammatically correct?

```suggestion
The FVM enables both computation and storage under a single roof. Imagine being able compute data on-chain and certify that the result and the output are verifiably correct.
```

Author: @johnnymatthews Typos.... And I'll take out the "imagine" too. Also gimmicky.

> Imagine being able to link all of that to the Dataverse (for sharing, preserving, citing, exploring, and analyzing data) and tokenization of datasets.

Author: @johnnymatthews Do you know what they mean by "the result AND the output." I think of them as the same thing.

### Dataverse and Data DAOs

The Dataverse is an open source software project for sharing, preserving, citing, exploring, and analyzing research data. See [The Dataverse Project](https://dataverse.org/).

> DAOs are Data Access Objects, patterns that provide an abstract interface to a database or other persistence mechanism. They provide specific data operations without exposing details of the database. See [Data access object](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_access_object).

Reviewer: Wrong kind of DAO. In blockchain land, a DAO is a Decentralized Autonomous Organization. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decentralized_autonomous_organization

Author: @johnnymatthews I know about DAOs for blockchain, but I thought we were talking about data here. Decentralized Autonomous Organization doesn't seem to make sense here.  Are you sure?

Author: Will work on the intro paragraph, in response to [slack convo](https://filecoinproject.slack.com/archives/C029MT4PQB1/p1655496096856579), and on this use-case section.

We can use the FVM to tokenize data sets to represent their value to humanity and kickstart the data set economy. We can then use it to incentivize further value creation through data processing.

With the FVM, it will be possible to write smart contracts to harvest and exchange tokens between peers to request computation, validation, transformations, feature detection, extraction, machine learning, and more.

If you chain these processes together, you can compound the value of the datasets iteratively. Imagine deploying self-learning entities on-chain to steward, maintain, and curate those datasets. Data DAOs could be automatically funded by using these datasets.

### Replication workers

We can write smart contracts for the FVM to automatically replicate data across providers in the Filecoin network without client involvement, all while obeying a user-defined policy with specifications like region, latency, price, or other characteristics.

> If clients today want to replicate a piece of data with N providers, they have to perform the data transfer of that data to each provider. With smart contracts on the FVM, incentivized replication actors would offload this data transfer to clients in a trustless way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If clients today want to replicate a piece of data with N providers, they have to perform the data transfer of that data to each provider. With smart contracts on the FVM, clients can offload this data transfer to incentivized replication-actors in a trustless way.
```

Wrong way around.

Author: oops! Thanks.

### L2 commitments

In the Filecoin network:

- Layer 0 is our storage and retrieval layer
- Layer 1 is our on-chain, computation over state layer
- Layer 2 is our off-chain, computation over data layer

Currently, solutions like Textile's Filecoin bridges to NEAR, Polygon, and Ethereum are operating without a Layer 1 commitment on the Filecoin network.

> With smart contracts on the FVM, you can harvest Layer 2 systems to commit onto Layer 1 of the Filecoin blockchain. You can provide consensus-backed commitments to make solutions, like bridges, oracles, payment networks, rollups, and more, provable and traceable end-to-end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With smart contracts on the FVM, you can harvest Layer 2 systems to commit onto Layer 1 of the Filecoin blockchain. You can provide consensus-backed commitments to make solutions like bridges, oracles, payment networks, rollups, and more, provable and traceable end-to-end.
```

## Smart storage markets

> Smart contracts on the FVM can bring richer deal-making functionality by introducing more automation at the actor layer (Layer 1 for state change computations) and alleviating infrastructure overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contracts on the FVM can bring richer deal-making functionality by introducing more automation at the actor layer and alleviating infrastructure overhead.
```

Some possibilities are:

- Auto-renewing deals: Without repeating data transfers, when deals expire or get slashed.
- Self-repairing deals: If a provider has failed sectors and wants to recover the data, instead of having clients resend the data, replication workers can resend it automatically.
- Retrying deals: Where a client dispatches their deal data to a depot and, for a small fee, has the deal data transmitted and satisfactorily delivered to the provider.

### Time-locked retrieval

The FVM enables storage deals with data that cannot be retrieved by anyone until a specific window of time elapses.

### Trustless reputation systems

> There are so many providers in the Filecoin network, clients need help picking the providers that they want to deal with based on quality of service, guarantees, performance, latency, or region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are lots of storage providers on the Filecoin network. Clients need help picking the providers that they want to deal with based on quality of service, guarantees, performance, latency, or region.
```

Author: @johnnymatthews Working on all these now. I know how important FVM is and I want to get it right. Thanks for adjusting the level of detail for this audience.
